# Early-Detection-Of-Forest-Fires-Using-Artificial-Intelligence
Software code for MCP3008, SCD-30 and MQ-2 to detect CO, CO2 relative humidity and temperature levels. Code for comparing binary classification accuracy on KNN and a sequential neural network.

As temperatures rise and dry seasons lengthen globally, the risk posed by wildfires to the economy, environment and public health grow dramatically due to increasing wildfire spread and frequency. Current methods of wildfire detection rely on the human eye or satellites, which are unpredictable due to wildfire spread that must occur before becoming detectable. This project aims to create a more reliable and quick detection method for wildfires. It integrates multi-sensor circuitry to a Raspberry Pi microcontroller to collect real-time carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, relative humidity and temperature levels. This data is then sent to the cloud, where it is processed by a neural network to classify if a fire is occurring or not in real time. Over 300 data points were collected, split between control data of fresh air and air while a fire pit was in use in the same environment to simulate environmental changes caused by a wildfire. The collected data was classified as either a fire or not, and used to train and test a K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) algorithm and sequential neural network built with Keras, to determine which binary classification approach was most effective by analyzing loss and accuracy metrics. Considering the limitations of overfitting on the KNN algorithm, the sequential neural network was most precise and adaptable with an accuracy rate of 97.26%. This developed system was successful in creating a rapid firmware system for collecting relevant data to wildfire risk and accurately determining if a fire had occurred in real time.
